	Changes made between 0.6.4 (2015/01/30) and 0.7.1 (2015/01/31).

The YESCRYPT_PARALLEL_SMIX and YESCRYPT_PWXFORM flags have been removed,
with the corresponding functionality enabled along with the YESCRYPT_RW
flag.  This change has simplified the SIMD implementation a little bit
(eliminating specialized code for some flag combinations that are no
longer possible), and it should help simplify documentation, analysis,
testing, and benchmarking (fewer combinations of settings to test).

Adjustments to pre- and post-hashing have been made to address subtle
issues and non-intuitive behavior, as well as in some cases to reduce
impact of garbage collector attacks.

Support for hash upgrades has been added (the g parameter).

Extra tests have been written and test vectors re-generated.


	Changes made between 0.5.2 (2014/03/31) and 0.6.4 (2015/01/30).

Dropped support for ROM access frequency mask since it made little sense
when supporting only one ROM at a time.  (It'd make sense with two ROMs,
for simultaneous use of a ROM-in-RAM and a ROM-on-SSD.  With just one
ROM, the mask could still be used for a ROM-on-SSD, but only in lieu of
a ROM-in-RAM, which would arguably be unreasonable.)

Simplified the API by having it accept NULL for the "shared" parameter
to indicate no ROM in use.  (Previously, a dummy "shared" structure had
to be created.)

Completed the specification of pwxform, BlockMix_pwxform, Salsa20 SIMD
shuffling, and potential endianness conversion.  (No change to these has
been made - they have just been specified in the included document more
completely.)

Provided rationale for the default compile-time settings for pwxform.

Revised the reference and optimized implementations' source code to more
closely match the current specification document in terms of identifier
names, compile-time constant expressions, source code comments, and in
some cases the ordering of source code lines.  None of these changes
affect the computed hash values, hence the test vectors have remained
the same.
